# Building Abstractions with Procedures

The acts of the mind, wherein it exerts its power over simple ideas, are
chiefly these three: 1. Combining several simpleideas into one compound
one, and thus all complex ideasare made. 2. The second is bringing two
ideas, whether simple or complex, together, and seeding them by one
another so as to take a view of them at once, without uniting them into one,
by which it gets all its ideas of relations. 3. The third is separating
them from all other ideas that accompany them in their real existence:
this is called abstraction, and thus all its general ideas are made.

                                                    John Locke


Complex systems, like well-designed automobiles or nuclear
reactors, are designed in a modular manner, so that the parts can be
constructed, replaced, and debugged separately.

Our procedural thoughts will be expressed in Lisp. Lisp was invented in
the late 1950s as a formalism for reasoning about the use of certain
kinds of logical expressions, called **recursion equations**, as a model
for computation.


A powerful programming language is more than just a means for instructing
a computer to perform tasks. The language also serves as a framework
within which we organize our ideas about processes.

Every powerful language has 3 mechanisms for combining simple ideas into
complex ones:
- **primitive expressions**, which represent the simplest entities the language is
                         concerned with;
- **means of combination**, by which compound elements are built from simpler ones;
- **means of abstraction**, by which compound elements can be named and manipulated
                        as units;

In programming, we deal with two kinds of elements: **procedures and data**.
(Later we will discover that they are really not so distinct.)
Informally, data is "stuff" that we want to manipulate, and procedures
are descriptions of the rules for manipulating the data.


## Expressions

An expression is what we type and input to an interpreter, the interpreter
responds by displaying the result of its evaluating that expression.

One type of primitive expression is represented by numbers.
Expressions representing numbers may be combined with an expression
representing a primitive procedure (such as`+` or `*`) to form a compound
expression that represents the application of the procedure to those
numbers. For example:

```scheme
(+ 4 5)
;; or
(* 4.3 5.1)
```

Expressions such as these, formed by delimiting a list of
expressions within parentheses in order to denote procedure application,
are called **combinations**.

The convention of placing the operator to the left of the operands
known as **prefix notation**.
Prefix notation has several advantages:
- procedures may take an arbitrary number of operands;
- no ambiguity can arise, since the operator is always the leftmost
  element and the entire combination is delimited by parenthesis;
- expressions can be easily nested, so we can have combinations whose
  elements are themselves combinations;

Talking about nesting combinations, humans get confused quite quickly,
hence it is a good idea to use what is called as **pretty-printing**.
This means that the following hardly readable (for a human) expression:
```scheme
(+ (* 3 (+ (* 2 4) (+ 3 5))) (+ (- 10 7) 6))
```
can become more readable by using a formatting which puts the operands
aligned vertically, like this:
```scheme
(+ (* 3
      (+ (* 2 4)
         (+ 3 5)))
   (+ (- 10 7)
      6))
```

Notice that even with complex expressions
the interpreter always operates in the same basic cycle:
- **reads** an expression from the terminal;
- **evaluates** the expression;
- **prints** the result;

This mode of operation is oftenexpressed by saying that the
interpreter runs in a **read-eval-print loop** or (REPL).

Lisp obeys the convention that **every expression has a value**.
This convention, together with the old reputation of Lisp as an inefficient
language, is the source of the quip by Alan Perlis (paraphrasing Oscar
Wilde) that "Lisp programmers know the value of everything but the cost
of nothing."

## Naming and the environment
We say that the name identifies a variable whose value is the object.

In Scheme, we name things with `define`, for example:
```scheme
(define size 2)
```

The `define` expressions are our first mean of abstractions, we
can bind them to very complicated expressions. Another 
example may be:
```scheme
(define pi 3.14159)
(define radius 10)
(define circumference (* 2 pi radius))
```
Notice that the interpreter will mantain a memory of associations between
symbols and values, this memory is called `environment` (more precisely,
global environment in this case) and as we will see a computation may
involve multiple environments).

## Combinations

To evaluate a combination, an interpreter must:
1. evaluate the subexpressions of the combination;
2. apply the procedure that is the leftmost subexpression
   (operator) to the arguments that are values of other
   subexpressions (operands); 

Observe that the first step dictates that in order to accomplish the
evaluation process for a combination we must first perform the evaluation
process on each element of the combination. Thus, the evaluation rule
is recursive in nature; that is, it includes, as one of its steps, the need
to invoke the rule itself.

Notice that combinations can be represented as trees, where each combination
is represented by a node with branches corresponding to the operator and
the operands.

In general we shall see that **recursion is a very powerful technique for
dealing with treelike, or hierarchical objects**.

In fact, the "percolate values upward" form of the evaluation rule is an
example of a general kind of process known astree accumulation.

Then after the repeated application of this recursive process we remain
with primitive expressions such as **values** (e.g., numerals), **built-in
operators** or **other names**.

These primitive cases can be taken care of by stipulating that:
- the values of numerals or other variables are the numbers/values that they name;
- the values of built-in operators are the machine instruction sequences that carry out the corresponding operations;
- the values of other names are the objects associated with those names in the environment;

We may also consider the second rule as a special case of the third rule if we consider built-in
operators as part of the global environment.

The key point to notice is the role of the environment in determining the 
meaning of the symbols in expressions.

Notice that the evaluation rule given above does not handle
defini-tions. For instance, evaluating(define x 3)does not
applydefinetotwo arguments, one of which is the value of the symbolxand
the otherof which is 3, since the purpose of thedefineis precisely to
associated with a value. (that is,`(define x 3)` is not a combination.)

Such exceptions to the general evaluation rule are called **special forms**.

The various kinds of expressions (ech with its associated evaluation rule)
constitute the syntax of a programming language. Lisp has a very simple syntax;
that is, the evaluation rule for expressions can be described by a simple
general rule together with specialized rules for a small number of special forms.

## Compound Procedures

**Procedure definitions**, are a powerful abstraction technique by which a 
compound operation can be given aname and then referred to as a unit.
An example:
```scheme
(define (square x) (* x x))
```

Interpreters can be modeled by using models with increasing complexity.
A simple interpreter can be modeled after the **substitution model**.
Where each name gets substituted by its value which can also be a complex
expression.

In practice, the "substitution" is accomplished by using a local environment 
for the formal parameters.

## Applicative Order vs Normal Order

pg.20
Lisp uses applicative-order evaluation, partly because of the additional
efficiency obtained from avoiding multiple evaluations of expres-sions
